docs: Add page for overview concept (#15454)
unoplatform/uno: doc/articles/concepts/overview/why-uno-platform.md

---
uid: Uno.Overview.WhyUno
---

# Why use Uno Platform for your project?

Thank you for considering Uno Platform for your next project. While we always recommend trying out any stack before deciding on your next project, here are some tips you can use for your in-depth evaluation.

## It's a platform, not just a UI framework.

> Uno Platform is a developer productivity **platform** and much **more than a UI framework**, for building single codebase, native, mobile, web, desktop and embedded apps with .NET.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uno Platform is a developer productivity **platform** and much **more than a UI framework**, for building single codebase, native, mobile, web, desktop, and embedded apps with .NET.
```

At the core is a cross-platform .NET UI framework, that allows apps to run everywhere with a single codebase.

> **However, built on top of this foundation is also a rich platform which includes libraries, extensions and tools that accelerate the design, development, and testing of cross-platform applications.**

Reviewer: Bold for a whole long sentence feels odd IMO

```suggestion
However, built on top of this foundation is also a rich platform which includes libraries, extensions and tools that accelerate the design, development, and testing of cross-platform applications.
```

Author: @Youssef1313 I certainly agree ;)

I was cautious in this draft with certain changes because @sasakrsmanovic gave me a PDF with content when I took up this item, so I'll defer to his expertise about those formatting details. Otherwise, your proposed changes make more sense to me

## It's Free and Open-Source.

Uno Platform is free and open source under Apache 2.0.

It is well funded and has a [sustainability model]() built in so that the project is sustainable in the long term. In addition, it is fueled by support from a thriving community of users who regularly send feedback and contribute.

> ## Same code based that runs on iOS, Android, Web, MacOS, Linux and Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Same code based that runs on iOS, Android, Web, MacOS, Linux, and Windows.
```

> Uno Platform apps run as single codebase native mobile, web, desktop, and embedded apps, utilizing the full breadth and reach of .NET. Uno Platform ships its releases in lock step with the latest .NET releases so you can always benefit from the latest and greatest advancements in the .NET world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uno Platform apps run as a single codebase for native mobile, web, desktop, and embedded apps, utilizing the full breadth and reach of .NET. Uno Platform ships its releases in lock step with the latest .NET releases. So, you can always benefit from the latest and greatest advancements in the .NET world.
```

> ## You can use your favorite IDE (Visual Studio, VS Code or Rider).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## You can use your favorite IDE (Visual Studio, VS Code, or Rider).
```

Need we say more? Use the IDE that works for you – Visual Studio, VS Code, Rider as well as CodeSpaces & GitPod. Wherever you are, Uno Platform is with you.

## You can work from your favorite OS (Windows, Mac, Linux).

> Remain on the operating system that you are on. A detailed list of target platforms for which you can develop from Windows, Mac or Linux is available. Our docs are also OS agnostic, so you can follow all tutorials regardless of the system you develop on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remain on the operating system that you are on. A detailed list of target platforms for which you can develop from Windows, Mac, or Linux is available. Our docs are also OS agnostic, so you can follow all tutorials regardless of the system you develop on.
```

## Use either XAML or C# Markup for your app UI.

> With Uno Platform you have a choice of building polished cross-platform UI with concise declarative UI markup using a modern XAML-centric syntax or declarative-style C# Markup. Both approaches are supported right out of the box. Our C# Markup approach works with both 1st party and 3rd party controls and application-level libraries, mapping directly to the underlying object model. All thanks to real-time C# source generators doing the heavy lifting for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Uno Platform, you have a choice of building polished cross-platform UI with concise declarative UI markup using a modern XAML-centric syntax or declarative-style C# Markup. Both approaches are supported right out of the box. Our C# Markup approach works with both 1st party and 3rd party controls and application-level libraries, mapping directly to the underlying object model. All thanks to real-time C# source generators doing the heavy lifting for you.
```

## Hot Reload that just works.

Our Hot Reload offers the most comprehensive solution for fast development loop – make a change and see it live everywhere is running in real-time without recompiling. Uno Platform Hot Reload works on:
- Visual Studio and Visual Studio Code
- All target platforms

> - XAML, C# Markup and C#

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- XAML, C# Markup, and C#
```

- XAML, C# Markup, and C#
- Bindings & x:Bind, Resources, Data Templates, and Styles
- 1st party or 3rd party controls
- Devices and Emulators

For more information, see [Hot Reload](xref:Uno.Features.HotReload).

## Stop typing markup and use Figma code generation

Design handoff is one of the biggest time traps, as design envisioned by the designer needs to be manually translated to markup. With our plugin\*, this process is automatic, and the result is well structured, performant XAML or C#.

For more information, see [Design and Build Uno Platform Applications with Figma](xref:Uno.Figma.Overview.GetStarted).

\*_Note this plugin is optional_

## Quickly create a project using the Templates Wizard

> Our [Uno Platform Template Wizard](https://platform.uno/blog/the-new-uno-platform-solution-template-wizard/) and its [live version](https://new.platform.uno/) allow you to get to a working project quickly. You can select your preferred version of .NET, choose the target platforms you want to develop for, pick a design system that suits your app the best, pick from the MVVM or MVUX architectural pattern, and throw in any mix of the rich set of Uno Extensions as starting building blocks. Additionally, you can include support for PWA, first-party API server, UI tests, and even generate initial build scripts for GitHub Actions or Azure DevOps, alleviating the hassle of figuring out the complex, cross-platform YAML specifics.

Reviewer 2: @jeromelaban for links to uno blog, should we be using aka links, or are we ok with these being hard links?

Reviewer 3: Links to the blog are fine, they're less likely to change I think.

Design handoff is one of the biggest time traps, as design envisioned by the designer needs to be manually translated to markup. With our plugin* this process is automatic, and the result is well structured, performant XAML or C#.

[Design and Build Uno Platform Applications with Figma](xref:Uno.Figma.Overview.GetStarted)

*_Note this plugin is optional_

## Ease of Use: Quickly create and customize an app with the Templates Wizard

Our [Uno Platform Template Wizard](https://platform.uno/blog/the-new-uno-platform-solution-template-wizard/) and its [live version](https://new.platform.uno/) allow you to get to a working project quickly. You can select your preferred version of .NET, choose the target platforms you want to develop for, pick a design system that suits your app the best, pick from the MVVM or MVUX design pattern, and throw in any mix of the rich set of Uno Extensions as starting building blocks. Additionally, you can include support for PWA, first-party API server, UI tests and even generate initial build scripts for GitHub Actions or Azure DevOps, alleviating the hassle of figuring out the complex, cross-platform YAML specifics.

> ## Your apps will be Pixel-Perfect across all platforms and look exactly the way you want them to look

Author: Agreed. I've shortened many of them, so hopefully that change won't deviate too much from what the original author had in mind.

> Uno Platform allows you to control each pixel using the concept of lookless-controls, similar to the "[headless controls](https://martinfowler.com/articles/headless-component.html)" term used in React world. Each built-in and even third-party control defines its logic (e.g. how the control reacts to pointer or keyboard input, how it handles data, or how different properties affect its behavior) independently of its visual style and template. This means you can completely change the look of each control as you see fit for every specific use case or to match your brand. You can even change the style of the control at runtime. Thanks to this, we can also offer two different built-in design systems – Fluent Design System based on Microsoft's design language and Material Design based on Google's design language – and both in light and dark theme!

Author: I attempted to resolve this. Please let me know if it would need another change instead.

## Continuous modernization with Uno Islands

We recognize that many developers have existing WPF applications they want to modernize, and offer such a path via [Uno Islands](xref:Uno.Tutorials.UnoIslands), which allows you to host modern Uno Platform content within WPF UI. This means you can start modernizing your application and bringing it cross-platform step by step, not just all at once!

## Native: Performance + Gestures + Never stuck

Uno Platform-built apps are **native apps**. As a developer, you can take advantage of each platform's capabilities and features while enjoying the flexibility to adapt and optimize as needed.

Uno Platform provides access to the **original APIs** provided by the target platform, both for UI and non-UI functionalities. You will be able to use the UI controls that come directly from the respective target platform's native SDK. This ensures that your app seamlessly incorporates the _familiar_ look and feel of the platform it's running on.

> You can tap into the richness of the ecosystems on the Web, iOS, and Android, Linux and Skia. This versatility allows for a broader reach and compatibility across different devices and platforms.

Author: Updated to improve consistency when listing the supported targets. 

> ~Skia~

## Navigation

As part of Uno.Extensions, Navigation provides a consistent abstraction for navigating within an application. Whether it is navigating to a new page, switching tabs or opening a dialog, navigation can be initiated from code-behind, XAML or from within a ViewModel.

## Authentication

Uno.Extensions Authentication is a provider-based authentication service that can be used to authenticate users of an application. It has built-in support for Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure AD), OpenIDConnect, Web and Custom.

## Skia drawing

The Uno Platform provides access to SkiaSharp as a render canvas for your app, enabling rich support to fine grained drawing primitives. Uno Platform also uses SkiaSharp to render the UI for Gtk/WPF/Framebuffer apps.

## Animations: Beyond storyboards, access to Lottie and Rive

Based on SkiaSharp support, Uno Platform provides AnimatedVisualPlayer to give the ability to render rich Lottie files directly in your app, for all target platforms.

## Performance and App Size with AOT/Jiterpreter

> Uno Platform allows to use .NET 8 features such as Profiled AOT (Ahead of Time compilation) and the Jiterpreter, to get better performance for your apps and balanced size. Profiled AOT is a powerful feature that allows to continue using the interpreter for code that is not often used, thus keeping your app's size down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uno Platform allows to use .NET 8 features such as Profiled AOT (Ahead Of Time compilation) and the Jiterpreter, to get better performance for your apps and balanced size. Profiled AOT is a powerful feature that allows to continue using the interpreter for code that is not often used, thus keeping your app's size down.
```

## Accessibility included

> Uno Platform comes with built-in support for accessible apps such as font scaling and support for screen readers. Support is provided for Windows Narrator, Android TalkBack, iOS and macOS VoiceOver and browser-specific narrators for Web / WebAssembly based apps. In addition, Uno Platform provides programmatic access to most UI elements, enabling enables assistive technology products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uno Platform comes with built-in support for accessible apps such as font scaling and support for screen readers. Support is provided for Windows Narrator, Android TalkBack, iOS and macOS VoiceOver, and browser-specific narrators for Web / WebAssembly based apps. In addition, Uno Platform provides programmatic access to most UI elements, enabling assistive technology products.
```

## WebView across platforms

When you need to display web content within your cross-platform apps, you can use our `WebView2` control. Not only will it easily handle rendering of both remote and in-app HTML content, but it will also allow you to implement bi-directional JavaScript communication without any hassle. Note that `WebView2` is currently available on mobile and WinAppSDK targets. We are working on an implementation for Skia targets.

## Media Player across platforms

Uno Platform provides the `MediaPlayerElement` control which allows your app to play media files back in your app. It is supported on Linux through libVLC.

## Monaco Editor on Wasm

For all your in-app text and code editing needs you can use our port of the Monaco Editor – the same that is used by Visual Studio Code. With full support for syntax highlighting, you could even build your
own WebAssembly IDE!

> ## Migration path with WPF Uno Islands

Reviewer: There was a previous section about Uno Islands. I think both sections should be merged into one.

Author: Done

Uno Platform's support for Skia powers integration with WPF. It allows an existing WPF application to include "islands" or portions of the app hosted using Uno Platform Islands and displaying WinUI controls. For instance, an app using a master-details pattern can show a WPF `ListView` as the master view and the details view as a WinUI control. In addition, DataBinding between both contexts is supported, allowing for a seamless transition between the two.

## Mix and Match XAML controls and Native components at will

Because Uno Platform apps are native mobile apps, you can embed any native control on a per platform basis into an Uno Platform app.

Uno Platform views inherit from the base native view defined in .NET binding or the native framework itself, you can incorporate native views into your app's visual tree. You can watch this example [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Cwzk8dDHs0).

Your app's powerful visual tree can also render native components through embedding in Skia targets.

## Choice of presentation framework

> With Uno Platform you get a choice of your favorite presentation framework – MVVM, Prism or Uno Platform in-box MVUX/Reactive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Uno Platform, you get a choice of your favorite presentation framework – MVVM, Prism, or Uno Platform in-box MVUX/Reactive.
```

## Standing on the shoulders of giants

Uno Platform was designed to be source compatible with the APIs of WinUI. This gives us the great advantage of being able to port existing code for even the most complex controls directly from Microsoft, preserving all their feature richness. And, because WinUI sources are now publicly available, everyone from the community can help!

## Developed by App Builders, for App Builders

We are first and foremost app builders who have built hundreds of applications for consumer brands via our sister company – nventive. We use our platform and tooling daily (dog fooding) and understand the pains of app development first-hand.

## Used to build countless apps for over a decade

Uno Platform started as an internal project at Nventive over 10 years ago, which we have used to develop [countless apps for top worldwide-recognized brands](https://nventive.com/en/our-work). In addition, many fortune-500 companies use Uno Platform for their internal, line of business applications, some of which you can find on the [Uno Platform case studies](https://platform.uno/case-studies/) page.

## Support: Community and Paid

> We are well known for a friendly and welcoming community which is always willing to help. If you are needing support time directly from the core team, there are also paid plans available which is how we sustain Uno Platform, a process explained with this [blog post](https://platform.uno/blog/sustaining-the-open-source-uno-platform/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are well known for a friendly and welcoming community which is always willing to help. If you need support time directly from the core team, there are also paid plans available which is how we sustain Uno Platform, a process explained in the [Sustaining the Open-Source Uno Platform blog post](https://platform.uno/blog/sustaining-the-open-source-uno-platform/).
```

> To see your free & paid support options see our official [support page](https://platform.uno/support/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see your free & paid support options, see our official [support page](https://platform.uno/support/).
```
